{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1504\cocoasubrtf820
{\fonttbl\f0\fswiss\fcharset0 Helvetica;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;\red38\green38\blue38;\red255\green255\blue255;}
{\*\expandedcolortbl;;\cssrgb\c20000\c20000\c20000;\cssrgb\c100000\c100000\c100000;}
\paperw11900\paperh16840\margl1440\margr1440\vieww13480\viewh13580\viewkind0
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f0\fs24 \cf0 \
Presumptions\
Humans are, by nature, problem solvers.\
The whole nature of building a product is that it\'92s a solution to a need.\
People involved in that process will both be naturally inclined to start immediately crafting solutions and also to see the benefit of standing on the shoulders of giants; \
The nature of much software development is that the tools themselves are abstractions upon abstractions to relieve the work of implementing everything every time.\
Machine code > Assembly > Byte code > High level languages > Generators\
\
So what does this have to do with Ethics?\
\
Every day, very often without thinking about it, we make ethical decisions.\
Getting an espresso from Butter Beans instead of Starbucks might just mean you didn\'92t want to cross the road or it might mean you have an unconscious preference for small retailers.\
\
 Other ethical decisions are deeper and more complex. \
Very often we don\'92t make them. \
The environment or culture we work in might pre-dispose you to not see them, or defer them.\
You might presume that this ethical decisions has been handled at a level before you and that it\'92s not your concern. You work on the tickets that appear.\
\
At the risk of sounding flippant about something incredibly serious, take a moment to think of some of the horror inflicted on people with the justification that \'93I was just following orders\'94.\
\
So what ethical questions do we face in this business?\
\
2 areas that leap out immediately to me are Honesty and Discretion.\
Our People and Legal team have been thorough in giving training and guidance on the expectations we have as employees of NOTHS about these.\
\
What are the intended take aways of the training for Honesty and Discretion?\
Honesty is being transparent and open about what you do and why you do it. The revers side is that you recognise dishonesty on the form of bribery when you encounter and know how to respond.\
Discretion is respect for the sensitivity for peoples personal data.\
\
So what does this have to do with being a Developer/UX Expert, Product Owner etc\'85?\
\
We want to make a better experience for our users, so they return to the site more often and buy more things.\
We do this so partners sell more products and make more money and so we as a business make more money in order to continue the cycle.\
We exist in a balance between the virtuous supporting of partners to make a living and the needs of the company to pay for the business and return value to shareholders and investors.\
How do we know if what we are doing is making people busy more things more often with a better experience?\
Analytics\
Testing\
Reviews\
Of those, whats the most immediate and understandable indicator\
Analytics.\
\
Exactly. I want to take a moment to consider analytics as an example of where ethical decisions YOU can make.\
\
What system do we use to collect usage data for our products? \
GA\
Let me ask you a few questions\'85\
1. How much do we pay for GA?\
2. Where can a user opt-out of analytics collection?\
3. Who here has read the terms and conditions of usage for GA?\
\
1. We pay with our users data.\
- but it\'92s anonymised. MasterCard example 
\fs29 \cf2 \cb3 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
de Montjoye, Y.-A., Radaelli, L., Singh, V. K. & Pentland, A. 
\i Science
\i0  
\b 347
\b0 , 536\'96539 (2015).\
\'93Although names, addresses and other information directly linked to card owners had been scrubbed from the data set, de Montjoye and his colleagues could pick out 90% of individuals if they knew the date and location of just four of their credit-card transactions.\'94\
- they can\'92t\
- They\'92re interesting.\
\
How does that sit with our concept of discretion with our users data?\
\
This is where ethics meets development. \
Your manager comes to you and asks you to complete a ticket that adds Analytics tracking to the website. He tells you to use `AcmeAnalytics`. \
\'93it\'92s free, it\'92s cool, all the kids are using it\'94\
\
What do you do?\
Do you think about the consequences?\
Do you presume they made the decision and defer to their judgement?\
Do you investigate the t\'92s & c\'92s?\
Do you push back if you think the service is a violation of our commitment to user data?\
If not, why not?\
You\'92re not responsible for you managers action, you\'92re responsible for yours.\
I\'92ll come back to what that can mean later.\
\
OK so let\'92s say you do push back.\
And let\'92s presume you get listened to.\
What are the options?\
1. Override you and do it anyway.\
2. Look for other analytics solutions\
3. Find another way to collect data\
\
1. The only question here is what do you do? What do your ethic allow you to feel comfortable with?\
2. There are other solutions that do not profit from the data gathered themselves, but they are paid services. \
How happy is the the company with the cost of the service vs the cost to their customers privacy?\
3. Analytics is not the only way to do this. you can test it, you can ask people, you can research and plan and consider. Yes, it\'92s more expensive, refer to previous answer\'85.\
\
It\'92s not the only tool we use with questionable ethics\'85 \
Do you know the process taken to evaluate the javascript tracking we use? With our emailing policy? \
How much tacit approval have you given over without checking?\
\

\fs24 \cf0 \cb1 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \
Asking the question\
You have to ask yourself a question\'85 what do you believe is right?\
Because if you don\'92t know what you believe is right then you might be at risk \
Why?\
Let\'92s return to the previous example of a developer being asked to implement AcmeAnalytics product.\
They trusted the process has been done above them\
\'93I don\'92t care that much\'94, \'93It\'92s not my problem\'94, \'93I\'92m paid to build this not work out all the legal stuff\'94.\
That\'92s cool until one day there\'92s a problem.\
A customer calls to ask what the company data policy is.\
They are directed to the privacy policy.\
The customer asks what software use to collect usage data.\
They are directed to AcmeAnalytics.io\
After a day they come back and say having read the terms and conditions of AcmeAnalytics.io terms they don\'92t like how their usage and purchasing data is being used.\
They ask where the opt-out option is in the site.\
They are told there isn\'92t one.\
A week later the customer does not return. But there lawyer does.\
They wish to sue for not adhering to the terms of the privacy policy for customer data.\
AcmeAnalytics wished to revoke the license to use their software for not adhering to the terms of the licence.\
The company looks internally for a responsible party to show they are serious.\
Suddenly everyone is looking at that developer and asking him the questions he previously gave such casual answers to.\
In this case they could well be the target for the lawsuit, since the terms and conditions pertain to the individual or entity making use of the service.\
\
Extreme example? yes\
likely? hopefully not?\
but it\'92s something to think about each day with each piece of work. \
What process led to me being asked to do this? Do I know the consequence of my actions? What \
}